Pattern "Extensions to Manage Contributions at Scale" (#444)
gruetter/innerSourceTest: patterns/1-initial/extensions-to-manage-contributions-at-scale.md

## Title

Extensions to Manage Contributions at Scale

## Patlet

> TBD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An InnerSource project is receiving too many contributions for the maintainers to handle, leading to low quality code reviews and premature rejection of feature requests.
By offering an extension mechanism outside of the core project, the maintainers enable contributors to experiment with their contributed extensions faster, while also clearly indicating to project users what is a core feature and what an experimental extension.
```

I tried myself on a Patlet.
It isn't easy to compress this pattern into a short Patlet, as the pattern contains so much. but I tried :)

## Problem

> As the number of new feature contributions to a mature InnerSource repository rapidly increases, it adds more burden on code reviews and maintenance. How do we allow for faster release of new features, encouraging innovation and experimentation; while also keeping repositories well maintained?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the number of new feature contributions to a mature InnerSource repository rapidly increases, it adds more burden on code reviews and maintenance. How do we allow for faster release of new features, encouraging innovation and experimentation; while also keeping the repository well maintained?
```

I would keep it to singular "repository" here as that's how the 1st sentence has it.

> As the number of new feature contributions to a mature inner-source repository rapidly increases, it adds more burden on code reviews and maintenance. How do we allow for faster release of new features, encouraging innovation and experimentation; while also keeping repositories well maintained?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the number of new feature contributions to a mature inner-source repository rapidly increases, it adds more burden on code reviews and maintenance. How do we allow for faster release of new features, encouraging innovation and experimentation; while also keeping repositories well maintained?
```
```suggestion
As the number of new feature contributions to a mature InnerSource repository rapidly increases, it adds more burden on code reviews and maintenance. How do we allow for faster release of new features, encouraging innovation and experimentation; while also keeping repositories well maintained?
```

## Context

> - More employees are contributing to strategic InnerSource codebases, some of which are scaling rapidly with new feature contributions. This is adding a huge code review backlog on a smaller group of maintainers, resulting in maintainer burnout as well as slowing down release of new capabilities.

Reviewer: Any resource about "maintainer burnout" that you want to link to, so that we capture a definition of that term that is helpful in this context?

Author: maybe this one https://www.jeffgeerling.com/blog/2022/burden-open-source-maintainer?

Reviewer: Optimally we would link to something specific to InnerSource. But we could use open source references as a backup as well. 

Also found theses two for open source:
https://opensource.com/article/19/11/burnout-open-source-communities
https://opensource.com/article/21/7/burnout-open-source

Author: I feel these articles did not describe the reasons for maintainer burnout in particular. I  could not find any external resources on how burnout applies in inner source context. I feel it could be dismissed as - "you should do innerSource during work hours, and get paid for it". But that does not solve the issue we faced. So I am getting rid of the term.

As a backstory, Our burnout was due to:
1. Full time jobs becoming about code reviews and answering questions - leading to maintainers ( who are developers ) being unhappy as they did not have any time to do any feature development themselves. This also affects the mission as maintainers did not have time to build the collaboration infrastructure needed to engage communities, or improve user experience in product . Without writing code themselves, it is hard for maintainers to set design principles or standards.
2. Lack of recognition or feeling of accomplishment - as we did not feel like we had anything to show for at the end of the day, if all we did was code reviews, and weren't able to accomplish individual goals or implement our ideas. Besides there was a large influx of incoming contributions , not all of which even get adopted, so it was also unnecessary cost for company to invest in hardening of features that did not have internal use cases. 
3. Project was getting difficult to maintain - automatic test frameworks took very long to run with more features being added, things were breaking all the time, increasing effort to make a new release

_(The large influx of contributions is very possible in AI domain with broad range of algorithms available and can very quickly become overwhelming. It took a few months of collaboration to harden each feature contribution to meet standards set by project)_

Extensions helped us free maintainers' time from code reviews to a large extent to work on other development as well, and results in only strategic features being ported to the primary project which have gained adoption, increasing feeling of accomplishment for time spent in hardening those features

Reviewer: I think it would be worth putting your definition of maintainer burnout somewhere into this pattern, especially as I don't think we got this anywhere else in another pattern yet.

Maybe into the [Story section](https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/blob/main/meta/pattern-template.md#story-optional) of the pattern?

Author: ya I think we can add it, but I also dont think this pattern is necessarily tied to the story , as in we dont want people aplying the pattern only when they hit the same story. We want to actively prevent burnout based on what is described in the context . 

But might be worth mentioning in story as this is what could happen and we want to avoid it proactively through this pattern

Reviewer: Sounds good.

We can add something to the story like this:
> To confirm whether this pattern might apply to your org, please check the points listed under Context.
> This story here is meant to provide additional background ....

> - More employees are contributing to strategic InnerSource codebases, some of which are scaling rapidly with new feature contributions. This is adding a huge code review backlog on a smaller group of maintainers, resulting in maintainer burnout as well as slowing down release of new capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- More employees are contributing to a strategic InnerSource codebase, which is scaling rapidly with new feature contributions. This is adding a huge code review backlog on a smaller group of maintainers, resulting in maintainer burnout as well as slowing down release of new capabilities.
```

I would use singular instead of plural here
i.e. this patter explains is by the example one core repository/project/codebase.

Of course there can be multiple projects within an org that are in the same situation. However then the pattern is just applied multiple times, right?

If you accept this suggestion, we have to review the following bullets for use of singular/plural as well.

Author: yes that is correct, thanks. I will take a pass and edit all

> - More employees are contributing to strategic inner-source codebases, some of which are scaling rapidly with new feature contributions. This is adding a huge code review backlog on a smaller group of maintainers, resulting in maintainer burnout as well as slowing down release of new capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- More employees are contributing to strategic InnerSource codebases, some of which are scaling rapidly with new feature contributions. This is adding a huge code review backlog on a smaller group of maintainers, resulting in maintainer burnout as well as slowing down release of new capabilities.
```

- Adding an excessive number of capabilities and code to repositories is making them difficult to maintain.

> - here is a growing backlog of new features and ideas for the products which have scaled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As the maintainers cannot keep up with feedback to the contributors and code reviews anymore it creates a growing backlog of new features and ideas for the products which have scaled.
```

There was something missing at the beginning of the sentence.
I added a suggestion which makes sense to me.

- The pattern applies in either scenario:
   - Maintainers find themselves rejecting new feature ideas to narrow down the scope of the products. This is hampering innovation in the community and restricting further expansion.

>    - To reduce backlog, new features are getting released without thorough documentation, hardening, or testing, creating a poor user experience. This is also bloating the size of the codebases, adding a huge dependency graph and making them difficult to maintain.

Reviewer: How is this "bloating the size of the codebases"?

Do you mean that:
- maintainers don't take time to refactor the project to integrate the contributions
- this leads to a code duplication

Author: - it mainly means a lot of code or utilities added to one repository
- many dependencies added, which would increase size of installed project
- more tests to maintain, and more code to maintain in general

Reviewer: Is the codebase bloating happen due to "new features are getting released without thorough documentation, hardening, or testing".

Or would this bloating even happen if the maintainers had enough time to review and integrate the contributions thoroughly?

Reviewer 2: Hi @spier! I am one of the other authors listed here.

For our specific application, which is a project where new capabilities are added on a regular basis to support more use-cases and things are rarely taken out, the "bloating" here is directly correlated with the number of things added to the primary repository.

Having more time to review and integrate the contributions could help for _some_ pieces of this. For example, for the growing stack of dependencies, in many cases you could take the time to rewrite a capability to avoid a new dependency. However, I'd say this bloat is to some degree unavoidable if most of the following are true:

- The use-case the primary repository tackles has a big feature space, and there is no plan for the rough number of capabilities in the project to hit steady-state, i.e., nontrivial things are often added and rarely deprecated/removed 
- The project is very important to many stakeholders, e.g., products, which accelerates deadlines. More user demands can make it hard to prioritize large tech debt to fix this.
- The project has a huge number of contributors, which is much larger than the maintainer group. This problem compounds onto the others, especially if contributors are trying to add new capabilities simultaneously

Reviewer: hi @alex-jw-brooks . Great to see you here, and thank you for your work on this pattern.

What you are describing here could be added to the [Story](https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/blob/main/meta/pattern-template.md#story-optional) section of the pattern. Possibly even together with the maintainer burnout bits described [in here](https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/pull/444#discussion_r961141465) as both of these seem specific to your project. 

I don't think that these aspects have been discussed in other patterns before, so sharing them could lead to interesting follow-up patterns and discussions.

Author: I was thinking about adding our story to that section as well, do you mind if we do it after merge of initial pattern though (after sept 5th)? we do have an interesting backstory to share I think and we may have more pattern ideas that we implemented to solve the burnout issues. Its essentially one story that could lead to a few patterns.

We will try to open up another issue as well with a community mentoring scaling model that we applied.
We also want to mention these issues as part of a case study we have coming up with InnerSourceCommons and IBM

## Forces

> - Maintainers and product owners want to allow for expansion, encourage innovation and experimentation without being very restrictive on contributions, while also keeping good code and quality standards for user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Maintainers and product owners want to allow for expansion, encourage innovation and experimentation without being overly restrictive on contributions, while also keeping good code and quality standards for user experience.
```

> - A large amount of time goes into hardening and thorough testing of features to meet product standards, but product owners may want to allow for faster release of new innovations for adopting products to explore before investing time in productionization of capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A large amount of time goes into hardening and thorough testing of features to meet product standards, but product owners want to allow for faster release of new innovations for adopting products to explore before investing time in productization of capabilities.
```

I have heard this as "productization" instead. Not sure if that is proper English either though?

Author: changed it to maturing

- Maintainers want to encourage the community to share innovations that combine product capabilities with other use-cases without adding more dependencies to the primary repository.

## Solutions

> Allowing extensions/plugins to high-scale InnerSource codebases or libraries can relieve the maintenance burden on repository maintainers and allow faster release of new features for adopting products to explore. This shifts maintenance of capabilities to extension owners and allows the primary repository to support capabilities that have been adopted more widely and are more strategic. Extensions provide a filter for new capabilities that may eventually move into the core of the project. Extensions also act as an incubation and community hardening environment, allowing for much of that hardening to happen organically rather than in a costly review process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Allowing extensions/plugins to high-scale InnerSource codebases or libraries can relieve the maintenance burden on repository maintainers and allow faster release of new features for adopting products to explore. This shifts maintenance of capabilities to extension owners and allows the primary repository to support capabilities that have been adopted more widely and are more strategic. 

Extensions provide a filter for new capabilities that may eventually move into the core of the project. Extensions also act as an incubation and community hardening environment, allowing for much of that hardening to happen organically rather than in a costly review process.
```

I would split the paragraph somewhere, as it is a bit long. Not sure where though.
I made a suggestion.

> Allowing extensions/plugins to high-scale inner-source codebases or libraries can relieve the maintenance burden on repository maintainers and allow faster release of new features for adopting products to explore. This shifts maintenance of capabilities to extension owners and allows the primary repository to support capabilities that have been adopted more widely and are more strategic. Extensions provide a filter for new capabilities that may eventually move into the core of the project. Extensions also act as an incubation and community hardening environment, allowing for much of that hardening to happen organically rather than in a costly review process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Allowing extensions/plugins to high-scale InnerSource codebases or libraries can relieve the maintenance burden on repository maintainers and allow faster release of new features for adopting products to explore. This shifts maintenance of capabilities to extension owners and allows the primary repository to support capabilities that have been adopted more widely and are more strategic. Extensions provide a filter for new capabilities that may eventually move into the core of the project. Extensions also act as an incubation and community hardening environment, allowing for much of that hardening to happen organically rather than in a costly review process.
```

In order for the extensions model to be successful, there are few architectural considerations to keep in mind:

> 1. <b>Easy to create:</b> To obtain community participation, extensions need to be easy to create.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Easy to create:** To obtain community participation, extensions need to be easy to create.
```

Please use markdown formatting here rather than HTML.
This is just one example but same applies to the other `<b>` tags.

>    - Create Github templates for extensions to allow addition of new features in new repositories, retaining the same modular structure as the primary repository, with the framework to package and release extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Create a repository template that extensions should use as a starting point. This allows the extensions to add their new features in new repositories, separate from the core projects. The template should provide the same modular structure as the primary repository, and include the framework to package and release extensions.
```

I would not tie this to "GitHub" here, as we don't know what the adopters of the pattern are using.
I generalized it to "repository template" instead.

Also I would use singular i.e. "template".

Lastly I suggest to keep the sentences as short as possible.
I provided an example of that above.
While that means that overall there are more words in this case, each sentence is shorter and hopefully easier to understand.

>       - Ensure that as the primary repository changes, the template(s) are well-maintained.

Reviewer: How do you ensure that?

Author: hmm the maintainers of the primary repository have to maintain the template as well

Author: can clarify that if needed

Reviewer: Yeah, I would suggest to clarify this.

The template is an important artifact in supporting the core+extensions approach. 
So helping the readers to understand the mechanics of the template seems important.

Reviewer 2: @alex-jw-brooks @gabe-l-hart, any thoughts?
```suggestion
      - Ensure that as the primary repository changes, the template(s) are well-maintained. The primary repository maintainers are responsible for updating the template(s) to ensure it is compatible with the main project. Following good versioning conventions, e.g., [semver](https://semver.org/), makes this easier to follow.
      - It is further recommended that the primary repository maintainers provide guidance on how to update extensions based on older versions of the template as newer versions are released.
```

Reviewer 3: Looks good. You might consider siting semver.org with `good versioning conventions`.

Reviewer 2: Good call, Gabe - I just replaced "good versioning convention" with a link to semver

3. <b>Dependency management:</b>  Each extension should be careful to pin the version range of the primary repository that it is built against (the same way it would any other dependency) and should be careful in its use of other dependencies that shadow dependencies of the primary repository such that the versions it chooses for those dependencies are compatible with the primary repository versions selected. Any conflicts with primary repository will be caught in the test framework for the extension.
4. <b>Testing strategy:</b> How to test extensions both individually and in combination?
   - <b>Testing extension individually:</b> Extensions template will provide a test framework to be used by the extension developers to test the capability added. This can include a framework for unit tests, runtime performance and quality tests.
   - <b>Testing extension in combination with primary repository:</b> Extension developers have a well-patterned method for testing their extension against specific versions of the primary repository without involvement from the primary repository's maintainers.

>    - <b>Testing extension in combination with other extensions:</b> Providing a test framework for this scenario could result in being excessive especially if there are a large number of extensions that are still being explored by users and unlikely to be all used in combination. If a user runs into conflicts while using extensions in combination (which should be unlikely with sufficient loose coupling), the user can raise an issue to the respective extension owners who will sort it out. As an extension reaches later phases of the lifecycle and gets merged into the primary repository, it would be tested in combination with rest of library and any dependency conflicts will have to be resolved at the time.

Reviewer: This is where you start calling the core project a "library".
I wonder if this is essential?

I would suggest to pick one terminology at the very beginning to refer to the "core project", and then stick to that term for the rest of the pattern.

Author: removed reference to library

5. <b>Discoverability and Usability:</b>
   - Make extensions easily discoverable with a publishing page showing the extensions that users have created and want to share for product usage.
   - Allow registration of extensions with the primary project for users to leverage extensions alongside the original project, thus keeping the same user experience.
6. <b>Lifecycle of extensions and maintainability:</b> Establish the lifecycle for extensions from creation to porting into the primary codebase, along with clear ownership guidelines.
   - Extension creators continue maintaining the extension, providing any support and fixing defects. Any extension left unmaintained will be unlisted from the publishing page.
   - Create criteria for when an extension can be ported to the primary repository, such as adoption of the extension by internal products and demand for the feature.
   - Porting process of the extension to the primary repository will follow more stringent code review guidelines as set by library maintainers.

> Following the principles outlined above ensures that:

Reviewer: I wonder if the points below here should rather go into "Resulting Context".
What do you think @NewMexicoKid?

Author: ya I was also doubtful where to put them, as we used the points to emphasize why we need these principles

Reviewer: I would be happy to keep it here for now, and possibly rework it into the Resulting Context or elsewhere in future PRs/reviews.

Reviewer 4: @spier -- I agree that the points (lines 59-63) would probably be best represented in the Resulting Context section.

- The addition of the extensions pattern with easy to use templates enables developers to add new features to a project's ecosystem without requiring them to write large amounts of boilerplate code.
- Extensions are discoverable in a repeatable manner to all users of the primary project; just because code doesn't live in the main repository yet does not mean it is not valuable.
- The maintainer burden is reduced until an extension has demonstrated that it fills an important gap in the primary project.

> - The core library abstractions can be a starting point for innovative developers rather than a target for later porting, thus reducing the overall burden of developing novel features for the library.

Reviewer: What does "core library abstractions" refer to here? 
It is the only time that this is mentioned in the pattern.

Reviewer 2: In this context, "core library abstractions" basically means writing the application in such a way that's compatible with the patterns in the primary repository. As a concrete example, if you're developing a machine learning library that has a bunch of models, you can either:

- Have someone write a model using whatever pattern they want. Then, once they have it working, they could port it into the primary repository and redesign it as needed to cohere to the project patterns. This is a source of huge code reviews and lots of hard-to-find bugs 
- In contrast - have someone use the patterns of the library / extension as a framework for writing their model from the very beginning, they don't have to go through the large porting process of getting it into the project's patterns without breaking what already exists

we will rephrase this a bit to be less opaque and not specific to just libraries

Reviewer 3: That's a good explanation @alex-jw-brooks. I think I added this line, so I'll try to rephrase it

- Developers are more likely to contribute and stay involved in maintenance and building communities for their codebase, which is also good for the health of the overall project ecosystem.

## Resulting Context

- The project is able to scale with the addition of new features, without adding a maintenance overhead on the primary project repository.
- Faster release of new features and experimental features for the community to explore, encouraging innovation and experimentation.

> - A post problem that can be introduced - what happens if an extension could not complete full lifecycle ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A post problem that can be introduced - what happens if an extension can not complete the full lifecycle?
```

   - If an extension is not adopted over a period of time and could not build a community around it to support maintenance, it would be up to the extension owner to continue maintaining it for however long they want to. If an extension is left unmaintained, it would be unpublished.
   - If an extension developer is unable to further maintain their project, and other developers in the community want to continue supporting it, they may maintain the extension going forward.

## Known Instances

> IBM Corporation has adopted this solution to scale InnerSource AI applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **IBM Corporation** has adopted this solution to scale InnerSource AI applications.
```

Can you share 1-2 sentences about what **core** and **extensions** are your case? That may illustrate how this pattern works in your specific scenario.

Author: is it more descriptive now?

Reviewer: It is!
Great stuff!

> IBM Corporation has adopted this solution to scale inner-source AI applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IBM Corporation has adopted this solution to scale InnerSource AI applications.
```

## Status

> TBD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initial
```

I suggest to call this **Initial**, and get it published quickly into our repo.
That will allow for more people to read it (as it is easier to discover than in this PR).

Then we can file a new PR within the next weeks to level up the pattern to **Structured**, following [these requirements](https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/blob/main/meta/contributor-handbook.md#requirements-level-2---structured).

## Title

Extensions to Manage Contributions at Scale

## Patlet

> An InnerSource project is receiving too many contributions, making maintenance difficult and resulting in a large code review backlog or premature rejection of new feature contributions. By offering an extension mechanism outside of the core project, the maintainers enable contributors to extend project capabilities with minimal code, thus encouraging innovation and experimentation. This would reduce the maintenance overhead on the core project, allowing it to contain only the strategic features that have been widely adopted, tested and validated. It would also ensure faster release of new features to the community, reducing the cost to harden a feature until it has proven its utility.

Author: ```suggestion
An InnerSource project is receiving too many contributions, making maintenance difficult and resulting in a large code review backlog or premature rejection of new feature contributions. By offering an extension mechanism outside of the core project, the maintainers enable scaling of project capabilities with minimal cost and maintenance overhead.
```

Author: How about this patlet @spier @alex-jw-brooks @gabe-l-hart ?

Reviewer 3: I like this simpler version

## Problem

As the number of new feature contributions to a mature InnerSource repository rapidly increases, it adds more burden on code reviews and maintenance. How do we allow for faster release of new features, encouraging innovation and experimentation; while also keeping the repository well maintained?

## Context

> - More employees are contributing to a strategic InnerSource codebase, which is scaling rapidly with new feature contributions. This is adding a huge code review backlog on a smaller group of maintainers, resulting in maintainer burnout as well as slowing down release of new capabilities.

Author: ```suggestion
- More employees are contributing to a strategic InnerSource codebase, which is scaling rapidly with new feature contributions. This is adding a huge code review burden on a smaller group of maintainers, resulting in a backlog of feature contributions as well as slowing down release of new capabilities.
- With the high volume of new capabilities being added, the organization is investing large amounts of time on code review cycles to harden the capabilities before release.  Not all of these capabilities gain adoption as they may not serve an internal use case.
```

Author: @alex-jw-brooks @gabe-l-hart I think we missed an important point in the context, added another bullet . Please review and feel free to edit

Reviewer 2: Hmm. I think this is slightly implied by `Create criteria for when an extension can be ported to the primary repository, such as adoption of the extension by internal products and demand for the feature`, but it is probably worth being direct about it

Author: that part is in the solution right? the context section lists when we would apply this solution - under what situations, so I think we have to call out the situation here

Reviewer 3: This seems good. The only thing I'd consider changing is the phrasing `the excessive number` which implies to me that the number of new capabilities is a bad thing in-and-of itself (as opposed to just being unsustainable). Maybe `With the high volume of new capabilities...`?

Author: yes refactored that and also edited to `Not all of these capabilities gain adoption` instead of many dont gain adoption

   - Extension creators continue maintaining the extension, providing any support and fixing defects. Any extension left unmaintained will be unlisted from the publishing page.
   - Create criteria for when an extension can be ported to the primary repository, such as adoption of the extension by internal products and demand for the feature.
   - Porting process of the extension to the primary repository will follow more stringent code review guidelines as set by library maintainers.

Following the principles outlined above ensures that:

- The addition of the extensions pattern with easy to use templates enables developers to add new features to a project's ecosystem without requiring them to write large amounts of boilerplate code.
- Extensions are discoverable in a repeatable manner to all users of the primary project; just because code doesn't live in the main repository yet does not mean it is not valuable.
- The maintainer burden is reduced until an extension has demonstrated that it fills an important gap in the primary project.

> - The core library abstractions can be a starting point for innovative developers rather than a target for later porting, thus reducing the overall burden of developing novel features for the library.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The core project's common code (e.g. base classes and utility functions) can be a starting point for new development that extends project's domain. This avoids the need to port innovative work after-the-fact, thus reducing the overall burden of developing novel features for the project.
```

- Developers are more likely to contribute and stay involved in maintenance and building communities for their codebase, which is also good for the health of the overall project ecosystem.

## Resulting Context

- The project is able to scale with the addition of new features, without adding a maintenance overhead on the primary project repository.

> - Faster release of new features and experimental features for the community to explore, encouraging innovation and experimentation.

Author: ```suggestion
- Faster release of new features and experimental features for the community to explore, encouraging innovation and experimentation.
- Reduced the costly code review and feature hardening process until the feature is able to prove its utility. This has cost savings benefits for the organization.
```

Author: @alex-jw-brooks @gabe-l-hart pls review this additional bullet

## Title

Extensions to Manage Contributions at Scale

## Patlet

An InnerSource project is receiving too many contributions, making maintenance difficult and resulting in a large code review backlog or premature rejection of new feature contributions. 

> By offering an extension mechanism outside of the core project, the maintainers enable contributors to extend project capabilities with minimal code, thus encouraging innovation and experimentation. This would reduce the maintenance overhead on the core project, allowing it to contain only the strategic features that have been widely adopted, tested and validated. It would also ensure faster release of new features to the community, reducing the cost to harden a feature until it has proven its utility.

Author: @spier I edited the Patlet.

Reviewer: nice!

It is a bit long now, as Palets are meant to be "problem/solution pairs in two sentences".
i.e. one sentence for the problem, and one for the solution.

The Patlet is what eventually will be shown in the [toc of the book](https://patterns.innersourcecommons.org/toc#p).
We try to keep them reasonably short to allow the readers to more quickly scan many patterns.

We could e.g. try to move some of the text from the Patlet into the Problem section.

However I would also be fine to leave this as is for now, and shorten the Patlet in future reviews.

You decide :)

Author: shortened it :)

5. **Discoverability and Usability:**
   - Make extensions easily discoverable with a publishing page showing the extensions that users have created and want to share for product usage.
   - Allow registration of extensions with the primary project for users to leverage extensions alongside the original project, thus keeping the same user experience.
6. **Lifecycle of extensions and maintainability:** Establish the lifecycle for extensions from creation to porting into the primary codebase, along with clear ownership guidelines.
   - Extension creators continue maintaining the extension, providing any support and fixing defects. Any extension left unmaintained will be unlisted from the publishing page.
   - Create criteria for when an extension can be ported to the primary repository, such as adoption of the extension by internal products and demand for the feature.

>    - Porting process of the extension to the primary repository will follow more stringent code review guidelines as set by library maintainers.

Reviewer 4: I was curious if this extensions process might benefit from a volunteer code review process from the apparently larger community of extension writers. Seems like doing so might help improve the extension quality without burdening the owning organization.

Author: possibly, we can have that as an optional step. It has been hard for us to get people to just volunteer for code reviews honestly so we adopted a community scaling pattern as this (for features being contributed to primary project) :
1. Every team that contributes a feature to core project, assigns a code reviewer who does first pass review before it comes to maintainers of project. Maintainers do second round of review (by then easy to catch errors like formatting, variable naming etc are expected to be solved)
2. Experienced contributors / code reviewers are granted TC status and as part of that they are directly responsible for mentoring others from their internal unit. That way cost of feature hardening belongs primarily to that internal team / unit, and maintainers of core project have to spend lesser time mentoring everyone.

We can apply the same pattern to extensions but keep it optional describing its benefits - if you review earlier, you might have lesser work to do when a product team starts exploring the feature. Alternatively you can invest in code review/ hardening once a product expresses interest in the use case (prior to porting to primary project)

Author: let us know if you think our community mentoring scaling pattern can be a separate pattern , I have not done by background work on that to see if something already exists in InnerSourcePatterns, but I was thinking of contributing something around it

- The maintainer burden is reduced until an extension has demonstrated that it fills an important gap in the primary project.
- The core project's common code (e.g. base classes and utility functions) can be a starting point for new development that extends project's domain. This avoids the need to port innovative work after-the-fact, thus reducing the overall burden of developing novel features for the project.
- Developers are more likely to contribute and stay involved in maintenance and building communities for their codebase, which is also good for the health of the overall project ecosystem.

## Resulting Context

- The project is able to scale with the addition of new features, without adding a maintenance overhead on the primary project repository.
- Faster release of new features and experimental features for the community to explore, encouraging innovation and experimentation.
- Reduced the costly code review and feature hardening process until the feature is able to prove its utility. This has cost savings benefits for the organization.

> - A post problem that can be introduced - what happens if an extension can not complete the full lifecycle?

Reviewer 4: This definitely sounds like another pattern (to be written): lifecycle management for extensions (a diagram showing the different states and paths would be helpful).

Reviewer: A similar diagram would already great in this pattern itself, as I would help the readers to understand (visually) who is responsible for what, and how the split between core and extensions is helping address the problem.

But that can be handled in future improvements of this pattern as we level it up to L2.

Author: Thats a great idea :) we will try to draft a diagram and add it here , if we feel it belongs to a different pattern we can split the pattern into 2
